##Archive of the Self Project Proposal
###Benjamin Moe
###11.17.14

The Scope

Everyday we snap pictures, make calendar appointments, write journal entries, and both knowingly and unknowingly, make archives of our daily lives. With the increase in portable technology and digital storage space, our ability to record the world around us has expanded to levels only previously foreseen by science fiction. Although most people still archive their lives in stops and starts, there are a vanguard of individuals aiming to digitally archive their entire daily existence. Lifeloggers, as they are called, present an understudied and important community of people who highlight the curious human desire to archive and store every thought and action. Although this urge, so clearly distilled in the form of the diary, has existed since time itself, lifelogging is its hyperbolic manifestation in the 21st century. It opens up the doors to not only a fascinating community pushing the boundaries of the way we use technology, but also raises crucial questions about our desire to preserve the fleeting present and the risks this desire poses.

The Problematic

One of the main manifestations of lifelogging are portable tracking devices that have flooded the consumer market in the last year or so. One device, the Narrative Clip, is a small camera about the size of a stamp that takes pictures every thirty seconds. Clipped to your shirt, it logs every place you've been and creates an automatic photo essay of one's life. By studying the promotional material for Narrative and the blog on it's site, I hope to explore what the wearable photographic device is trying to appeal to in customers and why people so desire to photograph every passing moment. Through a detailed analysis of the promotional material I will also branch out and discuss the Quantified Self movement as a whole, and the broader culture of people who are invested in archiving all aspects of their lives.

Why Me?

When I was a child I was enthralled with film and pictured a world where I could record an entire movie of my life. The possibility of recording everything around me, being able to look back at it, excited me and it unknowingly followed me as I grew up. As a teen-ager I began to use a weekly planner which was divided into days. After each day I would write down one or two sentences with what I did that day so I could look back in the future and know exactly what happened on say, February 14th, 2009. Along with the deep-seated interest in the ways we record ourselves I am also a student of anthropology and fascinated with niche communities that rarely get put under the lens of ethnography. One of these worlds that I have been paying attention to, in my notes, thoughts, and studies, are the communities based around new technologies. I am continually fascinated by the lingo, etiquette, hierarchies, and overall micro cultures that are formed around websites like Facebook and Twitter, and tech start-up culture as a whole.

Past Explorations

Since the early 80s, Canadian-born inventor Steve Mann has been experimenting with wearable recording technology. Over the years he has developed a wearable device, fixed permanently to his head, that records audio and video every moment of his waking life. His desire to archive his daily existence was so strong that he had a manifestation of it affixed to his very skull. Although Mann and others have done much technical research and writing on lifelogging technology, very little has been done in the way of a philosophical and anthropological investigation of it. One exception is that of Gordon Bell, who along with Jim Gemmel, wrote a book called Total Recall which examines lifelogging and the questions it raises about our memory and the urge to record our lives. Although thoroughly insightful, the book's main goal is preach the oncoming revolution of total recall through digital memory. I hope that this project will instead give an in-depth understanding of the Narrative device (both the device and the people who use it) and use that to raise new questions about why humans so urge to record themselves in the world.

Methodology

This project will draw mainly on the promotional material (videos, images, and text) on the Narrative website and its attending blog. It was also use seminal texts on the subject of lifelogging (such as the aforementioned book by Bell) and photographic/philosophical theory like Susan Sontag's On Photography.

Format and Audience

This piece is being written for Cabinet Magazine, "a quarterly of art and culture" that publishes works that uncovers previously ignored curiosities in the world and explores them from fresh perspectives. Their submissions guidelines (attached in full in the Appendix) require the piece to be under 3500 words, jargon-free, and accessible to a general sophisticated audience. The magazine has both a themed and unthemed section, and I will be submitting this piece to the unthemed part.

Plan

Week of November 24th: Finish Bell book, compile document of notes on Narrative site/videos, reread Sontag and Tagg

Week of December 1st: Have full outline + notes finished

Week of December 8th: Have completed first draft

December 12th: Submit final

Criteria for Evaluation

This project should be evaluated for its clarity in writing, its ability to give a interesting description of contemporary lifelogging culture, as well as raise salient philosophical and anthropological points. It should also be evaluated by how well it fits into the publication it is being written for, Cabinet, i.e. if it is a compelling piece of writing that is intellectual but not overly academic.

Appendix

Cabinet Submission Guidelines:

IMPORTANT: Please note that we receive a large number of submissions. In order to be able to look at everything we get and not keep you hanging for months, our submission policy is (unfortunately) as follows:

— We will only contact you if we can use your submission. Sorry not to be able to do otherwise.
— We will contact you within 6 weeks of submission. If you have not heard from us within 6 weeks, assume that we were not able to use your submission.

We really wish we could have a more generous policy that showed our appreciation for your keeping us in mind but we are a tiny non-profit organization run largely on a volunteer basis and we really can't do anything else. Thanks for your understanding.

Nuts and Bolts Guidelines (more general thoughts on the kinds of articles and artist projects we publish are given further below):

—We only accept electronic submissions sent to the address given at the very end of this page (this pertains to both texts and artist projects). Emails sent to other Cabinet addresses will not be processed. You must include the word "submission" in the subject line of your email so that it does not get eaten up by our spam filters. 
—The author's name(s), snail-mail and e-mail addresses, phone number, as well as a very short biography must appear on the first page of the text.
—We only consider finished texts and do not commission on the basis of proposals. Texts can be up to 3,500 words and should minimize as much as possible the use of jargon. The writing should be accessible to a sophisticated general readership. Artist projects cannot be designed to take up more than 7 pages of the magazine. 
— Authors should feel free to include relevant images in TIFF, GIF, JPEG, or PDF format. Please don't send enormous pictures with your submission. Submissions should not exceed 10 MB (if larger, our server will reject it).
—Texts should be submitted as an attachment in Microsoft Word or a file format we can open with Word. 
— We do not publish poetry or fiction. We also do not accept submissions for sound art or for our online art projects. 
— We do not accept texts previously published (in print or online) in English. We are, however, willing to consider translations of texts that have never been published in English. We do not accept artist projects previously published in another magazine.
—We are happy to consider texts and projects that have been submitted to other publications, but if pieces are under consideration elsewhere, please let us know in advance.
—Cabinet does pay for texts! The amount is determined by the length. We are a non-profit and our fees reflect our idealistic, noble mission (i.e; they are absurdly low).

Submissions deadlines for the next several issues as are as follows:
NB: deadlines apply to submissions to the themed sections; submissions to columns and the unthemed section are welcome at any point.

Issue 57 (Spring 2015, with a themed section on “Catastrophe”): 5 January 2015
Issue 58 (Summer 2015, with a themed section on “Theft”): 15 February 2015
Issue 59 (Fall 2015, with a themed section on “The North”): 1 May 2015

General Guidelines for Artists: 
Cabinet publishes artist projects that treat the magazine itself as an exhibition venue. Unlike most contemporary art magazines, we would like our reader to actually encounter the artwork rather than simply learn of its existence. Photography, conceptual projects, text-based work, or work that treats the formal issues raised by the print medium (i.e; paper, printing, ink, etc.) are particularly well-suited for publication in Cabinet. We do not publish documentation of sculpture or of a performance or installation. Video stills and architecture proposals are also highly unusual for us to print. While a resume is not needed, a brief statement about the work can be included if you think it useful. Don't forget that artist projects appear in both the unthemed and themed portions of the magazine.

General Guidelines for Writers: 
Cabinet is an art and culture magazine that approaches the world with an expansive definition of both these terms. We are interested in almost any subject matter, as long as your take on it is original and demonstrates how the apparently familiar world around us is in fact artificial, fascinating, and strange. Cabinet appreciates the unorthodox—daring theses, unfashionable stances, minute observations, forgotten cultural practices, and found documents.

We welcome historical material that sheds light on current cultural issues and are also interested in non-artistic practices that carry an aesthetic surplus. We publish a wide range of voices, ranging from the academic to the surreal. Our approach is to juxtapose high seriousness with the playful ("joco-serioso," as it were). We encourage you to see what kind of material we are interested in by looking at the list of contents of our past issues. Click on any issue cover on this page.

Articles about contemporary art should be idea- rather than person-driven. We avoid articles that are about a single artist's work, including interviews; nor do we run reviews or news items about forthcoming art world events. There are excellent venues that do so. (These excellent venues are often glossy and offer enormous writers' fees. Follow this link to visit the best of them).

Each issue of the magazine has four columns, an unthemed section, and a themed section. We do not accept submissions for the "Colors" column. You can submit for all other columns, as well as for the unthemed and themed section. For some unfathomable reason, some potential contributors seem to feel it is more prestigious to publish in the themed section and we have seen perfectly good essays twisted to fit the theme. Do not submit yourself to such unnecessary contortions. Stay true to what interests you.

Congratulations! If you are still here, we are looking forward to receiving your submission.

Please send your submissions to this e-mail address

Supplemental Links

Narrative's site: http://getnarrative.com/

Pew Report from 2013 showed that 21% of people track themselves with technology; clearly a growing drive (http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/06/04/the-self-tracking-data-explosion/)

Steve Mann;s sousveillance, checking oversurveilance by recording from below (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sousveillance)
